# TV-VAR-Bachelor-Thesis

Nowadays, time-series data have become a significant and widely used type of data in psychological research due to their ability to capture within-subject dynamics. An advantage of these data is avoiding making between-subjects hypotheses of within-subject data. The Vector Autoregressive (VAR) model is the most prominent and straightforward model to study such within-subject dependencies is the Vector Autoregressive (VAR) model. The structure of the VAR model is that each variable is predicted by a linear function of previous time points. However, a fundamental assumption of this model is that its variables are constant across time – the assumption of stationarity.
In contrast, psychological variables motivating behavior are dynamic, evolve fast over time, and vary across different individuals. Therefore, time-varying VAR (TVVAR) models seem to be a prospective approach for predicting psychological phenomena that consider these dynamic within-subject changes. This thesis aims to evaluate two novel TVVAR methods based on the well-studied Generalized Additive Model (GAM) and Kernel Smoothing (KS). Therefore, the thesis applies these novel methods to high-dimensional EMA time series to analyze their performance, advantages, and limitations. The analyses indicate reliable changes in emotion dynamics with the KS and GAM method over time. In this study, the KS method presents more stable estimates than the GAM method. Nevertheless, this application demonstrates the effectiveness of using TV VAR models to capture time-varying within-subject dynamics.
